What is the role of a student of the Economic University?
Good afternoon. Imagine that you are a student of the Economic University, who studied the basic economic and management disciplines for two years,
the basics of macro and microeconomics, the basics of management, the basics of marketing, and so on.
Well, in general, he met with the university students.
Now he needs to choose a specialization for himself in order to become a cool professional in the field.
It can be marketing, it can be logistics, it can be accounting, it can be controlling.
And the student thinks about how to make this choice.
He looks at the coin and thinks that, in principle, this choice can be made strategically by throwing the coin.
If the coin falls to the floor and the eagle falls, then he can choose marketing for himself.
If it falls to the top, then he will choose logistics for himself.
If it hangs in the air, then it will be accounting.
If the coin is on the edge, then it will be controlling.
The second option is that he can look around, try to analyze what professions will be in demand in the market in the near future.
And also look inside, close your eyes and think about what talents and inclinations I have, what attracts me the most.
If this is a creative personality, then, of course, he will choose accounting for himself, remembering such a term as creative accounting.
Companies, businesses often have the same situations when you understand that everything that has been so far cannot remain so and further.
You need to live differently and you think where to go, to the right, to the left or straight.
Companies often face the problem of a cardinal breakdown of the party's general line.
And in order to do this consciously, they have to do a strategic analysis.
Analysis of the external environment, analysis of oneself.
We will discuss the key tools that can be used to make this analysis.
My name is Vladislav Tolkach. I am the director of the Academy of Controlling.
This is the main place of my work.
This project is implemented by the joint efforts of the German School of Business and the Academy Controller.
I am a practicing business coach and consultant.
I specialize in the topic of strategy, organizational development and, of course, controlling.
The main tools of strategic analysis that we will discuss are used to understand the environment of the external environment in which our company operates.
There is a PEST analysis, or it is also called STEP.
This is an abbreviation of four English words.
This is an analysis of the political, economic, social and technological environment.
If you make an abbreviation, it turns out either PEST or STEP.
The second tool allows you to understand your industry.
Here I must mention the work of the guru of strategic management, Michael Porter,
who, for the sake of understanding his industry, recommends to businessmen to analyze competition, as well as the power of substitutes.
These are products from adjacent industries that can gnaw money from the pie that we and our competitors in our industry claim.
Here is the analysis of customers and suppliers.
The fifth tool is the so-called entry barriers.
This is what prevents potential players from breaking into our industry.
The third tool is the analysis of the factors of success in the industry.
In principle, it is a summary of the entire previous work.
When we rewrite all the issues that should be solved in our industry, if we want to earn something,
we need to work on them.
However, these issues are usually divided into two parts.
The first part is the basic issues that allow us to play football,
allow us to play on the football field, but do not guarantee us a win.
The second part is the so-called strategic issues.
If we work strategically, we have a chance to win football.
The fourth tool is the analysis of the strengths and weaknesses.
This is the analysis of the company itself, what is good and what is not very good at the moment.
The summary tool that summarizes the entire previous analytical work is the so-called SWOT analysis.
This is again an English-language abbreviation.
These four letters mean again the strengths and weaknesses, as well as the list of threats, opportunities and threats.
The last part of our course is the organizational aspects.
We will talk about how to do this analysis better, who to call to a strategic meeting, how to distribute roles.
These are the nuances that we will discuss in the last part.
In the 1970s, the Armenian radio was asked if a snake could break its spine.
The Armenian radio thought and replied that a snake could break its spine if it crawled along the party's general line.
Sometimes the company experiences a stage of a radical break in the party's general line,
when the leadership comes to work on Monday and says,
guys, everything is wrong, everything we do is wrong, it was right before, but it is not right in the future.
We must remake our strategy, remake our business model, go another way, otherwise we will not survive.
Imagine that you are a distributor of body care, home chemistry, cosmetics, and you are in a tight spot.
On the one hand, the factory is pressuring you, twisting your hands at the price and payment conditions.
On the other hand, the clients are pressing you harder, who also twist your hands at the price and payment conditions.
In addition, the competition is getting tougher, and you understand that you cannot live like this.
You understand that you have three options as a distributor.
Either go into production, or go into logistics, become a cool logistics operator, or create your own business.
The second example is also about this.
The company produces lasers.
Until some point, it felt good in the industry, but everything changes, competition changes, suppliers change, clients change.
The management of the company understands that it is impossible to live as we used to live.
I drew three scenarios for myself.
The first scenario is the so-called operational perfection, when the company will bet on a standard mass laser,
to produce lasers in a very narrow range, focusing on the mass market, and polishing its logistics and production.
At the same time, the business cannot boast of innovative ideas, it is unlikely that it can boast of an amazing service or a strong brand.
The second scenario is the product management, which usually involves huge investments in new-ocre, in the final development.
Some of these investments go to waste, but some of them are likely to be successful,
and the company offers the market an absolutely innovative product, an absolutely innovative laser,
and can remove the cream from this product for some time.
The third scenario is customization,
offering a laser to a client with very sharp edges,
because this is what the client wants,
according to Feng Shui, this is correct, when the laser has round corners and yellow color,
as well as a specific lamp that the client wants to see.
There are three ways to go, operational perfection, product management, or int-poshiv.
But the company cannot go in three ways at the same time, due to the limitation of all types of resources.
The third example is the company working on the ice cream market.
In recent years, the ice cream market has not grown very intensively, and at the moment it is not growing at all.
At the same time, another direction has grown, the so-called cold logistics,
that is, cold transport, in which you can transport ice cream, dumplings, frozen vegetables,
and warehouses where all this can also be stored.
This cold logistics has grown to the same volume in terms of revenue and profit as ice cream.
If you do this closely, you can earn a lot, because the market is still quite raw.
And again, the company thinks about how to live further, whether we need this ice cream,
or whether we should become operators in the cold logistics market.
All these three companies, in order to make a conscious strategic choice,
and develop a competitive strategy that is understandable for themselves and for their employees,
must make a so-called strategic analysis at the stage number 0.
The logic of this strategic analysis is presented on this slide.
In a nutshell, it consists of two main tasks,
this is a strategic analysis of the external environment and a strategic analysis of the company itself.
When we analyze the external environment, we usually use two tools.
This is the analysis of the PEST factors, this is the so-called analysis of the remote environment.
The company looks at the policy and legal factors that can influence its work in the near future.
The company tries to understand how the economic environment will behave in which it works.
The company tries to understand the factors of social nature.
And the company tries to understand the factors of technological nature.
But this is the so-called remote environment.
In addition, there are factors of the so-called near environment,
which are very well described in the works of Michael Porter,
and are known as the five-force model.
The first is the competition in the industry,
and the power of the substitutes is the clients and suppliers,
as well as the analysis of the entry barriers that prevent the emergence of new players in the industry.
If we use these two tools,
we will get a good understanding of what is happening and will happen in our external environment.
In addition, in order to develop a strategy,
you need to understand your own strengths and weaknesses,
what is already good and what is not very good.
For these purposes, I recommend the analysis of the strengths and weaknesses,
which can be done in the format of the so-called chain of value creation.
The fourth point is, as a rule, the requirements of the owners,
financial and non-financial,
can significantly affect the strategic choice and the business model
that the employee management is trying to implement in practice.
The results of all these analyses can be summarized in the final summary document,
which is called the SWOT analysis,
and represents a set of strengths and weaknesses,
opportunities and threats listed on a piece of paper in the A4 format,
in the One Page Only format.
After that, we can assess and weigh the further paths of our own development.
We can assess whether we will go into production, logistics, or our own retail,
or we will go into operational improvement, product leadership, or int-poshiv.
After weighing the alternatives, we will make our own strategic choice.
So, the analysis of external environment factors,
which consists of two sections,
the analysis of the factors of the distant environment and the analysis of the factors of the near environment.
When analyzing the factors of the distant environment,
we can use the PEST or STEP model.
I repeat that this is an abbreviation of four English words.
The political-legal environment is the letter P,
the economic environment is the letter E,
the letter S is the factors of the social environment,
and the letter T is technology.
What do we analyze at the stage of the analysis of political-legal issues?
We try to understand how much the law that operates in the external environment
can affect our business.
We try to predict how it will change,
in a positive or negative direction.
The second point is to understand how seriously the state can interfere in our business.
The third point is to understand how great the level of corruption in the market we work in is.
We ask ourselves questions like this
before developing a strategy,
trying to understand our political-legal environment.
A small example on this topic.
Ukraine is a market for buildings made of fast-mounted metal structures.
A construction company offers its customers buildings made of metal.
It can be a logistics center, a warehouse, a production facility,
a hypermarket, a metal box.
In 2005, the company felt very good,
experienced a stage of rapid growth,
at the end of the year it rented a new office space with a margin,
and the sales plan for the next year was quite ambitious.
But due to political reasons, the orange revolution,
sales fell significantly next year.
Potential customers did not have less money,
but they were afraid to invest in logistics centers,
hypermarkets, real estate.
They were waiting for the government's decision
on what was allowed and what was not allowed in Ukraine.
They waited for almost a year,
and only in November of the following year,
the company sales began to grow again.
We understand how political factors can affect our success.
The letter E, the letter M, is the economy.
We analyze inflation,
we try to understand how the cost of capital on the market will change,
whether capital will increase or decrease,
we try to understand how unemployment will behave,
what will happen in the labor market, and so on.
The letter S is the social environment factors.
Here we analyze the demography on the market,
we try to understand the cultural features of some markets,
we can analyze the level of education on the market.
These are the questions we discuss,
analyzing the letter S, the social environment.
The fourth section is the technological environment factors.
The influence of the Internet on our business,
the influence of new technologies in our industry,
the influence of IT.
These are the factors we analyze before developing a strategy.
A small nuance.
If a company operates in several markets,
I mean geographical markets,
for example, it operates in the Russian market,
in the Ukrainian market, in the Belarusian market,
and in the Polish market.
It may be that the letter P on these four markets
is quite different and affects the business in a very different way.
Again, the letter E, the economic factors,
can be quite different on these markets
and can also affect our business.
The conclusion is that the company will have to pass this PEST analysis four times.
Pass the PEST analysis for the Russian market,
for the Ukrainian, for the Belarusian, for the Polish,
to understand all the nuances that it will have to consider
in the next two or three years if it wants to continue working on these markets.
A small nuance.
When we do a PEST analysis,
we evaluate the positive or negative impact of all these
political, legal, economic, social and technological factors on our business.
We must understand that the same factors
in companies from different industries can have a positive or negative effect
on some companies, have a neutral effect.
For example, in Krzysztof Obloy's book
The Strategies of a Successful Company,
which is recommended in the list of literature,
there is a funny observation about how the factor on the letter S,
namely the formation of the YAPI class,
Young Professionals,
in Poland, has a very different effect on businesses from different industries.
It is very positive for restaurants,
for car and car salesmen,
that young professionals are being formed in Poland.
But companies that produce children's goods,
diapers, children's food,
they are in complete sorrow,
because YAPI children are usually started late.
And if a company makes tractors,
then the formation of the YAPI group has no effect on it.
And another nuance.
When we do a PEST analysis,
we do not just list the factors that affect us.
We must immediately ask ourselves the question,
what exactly a particular structural unit of our company should do,
or, on the contrary, should not do, in response to the effect of this factor.
In the materials, we have an example of a PEST analysis of a company that produces websites.
It is engaged in web design.
The company is located in one of the regional centers of the Russian Federation.
There it has a production site and a central office.
However, the company is interested in the Moscow market,
and it has a representative here who works with clients
and, analyzing the PEST factors,
the company, for itself, by the letter S,
denotes a high degree of snobbery in public consciousness in Moscow.
And we must immediately understand what this means for our business,
for the individual structural units of our company.
It means that the company should look like a Moscow one,
it should have an office in Moscow,
it should have a convincing client list,
and sometimes for this you have to win a tender
to supply the site, for example, Coca-Cola or Procter & Gamble for 1 euro.
That is, the Coca-Cola company announces a tender,
I want a site,
and the company we are considering won a tender for 1 euro,
because it needs a convincing client list to work in the Moscow market.
So, when we analyze the PEST factors,
we always ask ourselves what this factor means for our company,
how it will affect our company in the near future,
and what we should do and what we should not do in response to this factor.
We have at least two examples from different industries in our materials.
For each tool that we are considering,
the first task that I recommend you to do is to conduct a PEST analysis for your company.
You can find the image of those mini cases, those examples that are in our materials.
PEST analysis of the Russian market with the eyes of the company that makes the sites,
and the example of the PEST analysis of the Ukrainian market with the eyes of the company that works in the kitchen furniture market.
Please remember that if you have to work in several markets,
you will most likely have to do several PEST analyses.
For one market, PEST, and for another market, PEST.
And please remember that you do not just list that inflation is like this,
that the currency rate is like this, that unemployment is like this, and that the level of education is like this.
You must immediately try to understand how this will affect your business in the near future,
and ideally, even form a so-called to-do list, a list of what needs to be done in the near future
in order to take into account the effect of this factor.
For example, the company sells spare parts and says that in recent years there have been more traffic jams on the streets of cities,
and more and more often people began to buy Asian and American brands.
Such trends are on the market.
What does this mean from the point of view of our strategy?
This means that our product portfolio needs to include more spare parts for American and Asian cars.
Given that there are many traffic jams, the clutch breaks, the gearbox breaks,
so the demand for these spare parts will most likely increase, and we will be able to sell more of them in the coming years.
This is a specific conclusion for the product portfolio based on the results of the PEST analysis.
Please, not just a list of factors, but a list of what needs to be done in the next column.
A so-called to-do list, a list of necessary actions,
which can be immediately recorded in a document called a strategy.
The next tool we will look at is the analysis of the factors of the near environment.
This analysis is carried out using the model proposed by Michael Porter.
This model is known as the Five Force model.
Michael Porter, explaining why the value of the profitability of the invested capital is average,
in different industries, proposes the Five Force model.
He says that the ROI, the profitability of the invested capital,
depends on how the Five Force configuration is formed in the industry,
how sharp the competition in this industry is, and how powerful the supply of spare parts is.
Spare parts are products from other industries,
which can bite off a piece of the pie that we and our competitors claim.
These are not our direct competitors, these are players from other industries,
but they are able to pull the money of our clients.
In principle, these are two similar forces, but Porter divides them into two parts.
The first force is the competition, these are players in our industry.
The second force is players from other industries,
which are able to influence the situation in the industry in which we work with our competitors.
The third force is clients, with whom we trade in terms of price and payment conditions,
and suppliers, with whom we also trade in terms of price and payment conditions.
The fourth force is the entry barriers, these are the brick walls that we ourselves or jointly build with our competitors.
We can add barbed wire to the top, and a couple of machine tools with dogs,
so that new players do not come to our industry.
If we do this, then with other equal ROI, the profit of the invested capital will be greater.
For example, IKEA, working in the Russian market, complains in an interview to a Russian magazine
that local competitors have lobbied for high customs duties, which IKEA is forced to pay for customs.
Local Russian furniture makers lobbied for this regulatory act in their interests,
and, in fact, they have taken their position in the industry with a fairly high brick wall.
If they had not done this, the profit of the invested capital, with other equal ones, would have been less.
Let's try to understand how the configuration of 5 forces on the porter affects the assignment of the profitability of the invested capital in the industry.
The German brewery industry, the competition in the beer market in Germany is the most severe for several centuries.
In 1516, the so-called Reinhardt's Code was adopted in Germany,
according to which beer can be called a drink consisting only of water, malt and hops.
There can be no other components in beer.
If there is ascorbic acid or orange zest in beer, then this drink should be called not beer, but something else.
Players in the industry work with the same set of resources, namely water, malt and hops.
Water is about the same, malt is about the same, hops are about the same.
They need to be different from each other in at least one way or another, but in this industry this is quite difficult.
We can say that all the niches and niches in the German brewery market are clogged for a long time.
For example, in Bavaria there is the city of Bamberg, where a local player in the beer market produces the so-called Rauchbier,
which can probably be translated into Russian as smoked beer.
This is beer that smells a little like smoke or smoked sausage.
No benzoles are added to the beer, this is water, malt and hops, this is Reinhardt's Code, the law of 1516.
But the technology of making this drink itself obviously involves the use of some coals through which this beer is filtered,
and as a result it smells a little like smoked sausage.
That is, the niches and niches are clogged, the competition is fierce.
In addition, players in this industry have to reconcile, not reconcile, but reckon with the actions of the substitutes.
This can be water, ordinary water, which the Germans drink more and more.
It can be wines from the New World, Chilean, Argentinian, not only from the New World.
It can be weak alcohol cocktails, it can sometimes even be ice cream.
If you look at the sales, beer and other drinks on the German market,
you can see that beer has been declining in recent years,
and the volume of water consumption, the volume of wine consumption, the volume of weak alcohol cocktails, they are growing, and quite seriously.
The younger generation of Germans says that beer is an old-fashioned dad's drink.
This is the drink that the dad drinks when he comes home from work.
Well, for a young German, drinking an old-fashioned drink is not good, he must drink a weak alcohol cocktail.
In other words, the power of substitutes, products from adjacent and other industries is also very high.
The client. The client can be divided into two parts.
These are retail networks that buy at this price and may not pay 180 days,
and the end consumers, who, as we said, are not doing very well either, switching to other drinks, water, wine, and so on.
Suppliers.
Gold is constantly rising, copper is constantly rising, electricity is constantly rising.
Suppliers of equipment also spin beer makers' hands.
In general, almost by the entire list of suppliers, everything is quite difficult.
In such a heavy industry, the profitability of invested capital will obviously not be very high.
There are probably not so many such sad industries, but we see how Michael Porter's theory of five forces explains what money we can count on working in the retail industry.
We must understand our industry, we must understand how competition will affect us in the near future,
how the power of clients will change, how the power of suppliers will change, what barriers there are and what barriers there may be.
But we should not passively observe this.
We must try to actively influence all five forces, offer something unique to our clients,
try to actively work with suppliers, try to be friends or go into niches, working with competitors.
We must create entry barriers, create entry barriers alone or together with competitors,
but one way or another, actively working across the entire list of five forces.
So, when we analyze our industry, we try to understand how our competitors will behave in the near future,
whether players from other industries, replacement products, will affect the situation in our industry,
how the power of clients will change, this is primarily the ability of clients to trade at a price and on payment terms,
as well as the power of suppliers, again, the ability to trade with us at a price and on payment terms.
The fifth force is the entry barriers that prevent the emergence of new players in our industry.
Typical questions that we analyze, using this tool on competition,
are to understand the degree of sharpness of competitive struggle in our industry,
to understand how consolidated players in our industry are, how the degree of consolidation will change in the near future.
By analyzing the replacement products, we ask ourselves how much better or worse are the replacement products from other industries
in terms of price-quality ratio, if we compare it with the products that our industry produces.
If we analyze our clients, we ask how great is the ability of our clients to bargain with us at a price and on payment terms.
We can imagine ourselves as a person who arranges armwrestling with a client and asks,
can I win a client at a price and on payment terms, or the client wins me at a price and on payment terms.
The same with suppliers, the same with armwrestling, the price of the purchase and the payment terms.
As for the entry barriers, everything is reduced to money, probably,
but if we do not reduce everything to money and do not analyze only the size of the investments that we need to enter the industry,
we can analyze, for example, legislative barriers, we can try to understand how deep in the consumer consciousness there are myths
that the products that are offered on the market by already existing players are good,
and we can try to understand how difficult it is for new players to get on the shelf in a retail store.
In general, the barriers to entry can be all kinds, in principle, everything can be reduced to money,
but there are factors that play a role besides financial factors.
A small but important point.
In the 21st century, the boundaries of industries are erasing, and there are a lot of interesting businesses that are created at the junction of industries.
Imagine, there is a company that produces sites, namely, promotional sites,
and, in principle, it works at the junction of two industries, the IT industry and the marketing industry.
It offers the client not just a website, it offers him a tool for promoting its products on the market.
There is a certain concept of promotion, there is a certain IT solution combined with ideas in the field of marketing.
The conclusion is that a company, analyzing its industry, should, in fact, analyze two industries,
the analysis of 5 forces for the IT industry and the analysis of 5 forces for the marketing industry.
There is no other way.
Another example.
The Controller Academy is a structure that was created in Germany in 1971 by Albrecht Dall.
It is a business built at the junction of two industries, namely, business education, in particular, controlling, and tourism.
The Controller Academy offers the client a mix between new knowledge and a cool vacation in the Alps in Bavaria.
It offers the client to come to them for a week, get new knowledge, get communication with colleagues from other industries,
get new ideas, and also spend time in nature, a clean lake, delicious Italian food, a pleasant atmosphere.
This is the so-called edutainment.
Again, the junction of two industries, in this case, business education and the recreation industry.
Again, a company operating in this business should, in fact, analyze two industries,
namely, business education and recreation industry.
The third example you see on this slide is a company that produces inter-room doors.
It has a production site, and the product made in this production site is transferred to dealers
or to its own structures that are engaged in wholesale sales.
In the end, the door goes to the retail market, and the company dreams of its own retail market, but so far it does not have one.
It has several production sites, and it has several wholesale structures that can buy on their own production sites, but can also buy from competitors.
In principle, again, analysis of two industries is necessary, analysis of 5 forces for the production part of the company,
because wholesale structures are the clients for the production part of the company.
And the second analysis is necessary for players in the wholesale market,
because the client for them is already the retailer, and the end customer who buys an inter-room door,
the supplier is not a wood supplier for the production part of the company,
but a production structure that makes a ready-made inter-room door.
And again, analysis of 5 forces for two industries is necessary.
The next nuance. When we analyze competition, as a rule, we have to divide competitors into so-called strategic groups.
A strategic group is a group of players of the same industry, which are similar to each other by some criteria.
For example, if we analyze the industry in which sites are made, we can divide the players in the industry into more or less homogeneous groups,
drawing a simple matrix in which there are two variables.
One variable will be the creativity of the sites, that is, how creative the site is.
It can be highly creative, medium-creative, or low-creative.
And the second variable is the so-called technological ability of the site.
What the site can do, what opportunities are embedded in it.
The technological ability of the site can be high, medium, or low.
On the one hand, there are students of the second or third year in this industry who can make a site for their friends or not necessarily friends.
This site will usually not be very creative and not very technological.
It can cost two bottles of beer. But this is also a site.
On the other hand, sites can be offered in this industry that are simultaneously super creative and super technological.
Such a site can cost 90 thousand euros.
On this slide you see four strategic groups.
There is a group of players in the gray industry, which offers super creative sites, but they are average in terms of technology.
There is a leader, a larger circle, and smaller players are rummaging around it.
These are small gray circles.
If you look at the orange group, this is a group of players who offer super technological sites.
And the sites can do a lot, but the creativity of these sites can be quite average.
There is also a large orange circle, and small players, whose sales volume is slightly smaller.
But they also work in this strategic group.
The upper right field is empty.
Not because no one knows how to make super creative and super technological sites.
The demand for such sites is very small.
Sometimes orders are made, but they are rare.
There is a group of students who can make a site for a bottle of beer or two.
These are blue players.
The lower left square.
And, for example, there is a strategic group of players in green, who offer medium-sized sites in terms of technology and medium-sized sites in terms of creativity.
It is impossible to say that orange players are direct competitors for blue or blue players.
The price of the question is fundamentally different.
A site for orange players or for gray players can cost several tens of thousands of euros.
And a site for blue players can cost several tens of euros.
And a very important point when we draw this table, this matrix, is the analysis of the so-called migration barriers.
If a player works in a green strategic group, he is tired of it.
Or he is not interested in it.
Or he thinks that he will not earn much money in this strategic group.
He wants to migrate to another strategic group.
For example, he must overcome the so-called mobility or migration barriers in the orange or gray group.
It can be new staff, new equipment, investment in marketing, and so on.
But in order for a company from one strategic group to move to another, it has to move up, down, left, right along this matrix.
And as a rule, you have to overcome the so-called mobility barriers.
And this is a very important point.
We must understand what mobility barriers we will have to overcome if we want to move from one strategic group to another.
The second example is the kitchen furniture industry.
A company, analyzing its strategic groups, uses the price as one variable.
How much does the kitchen cost?
The industry is divided into three parts.
There are three layers.
This is the economy class, the comfort class, and the premium class.
The economy class is 1,500 euros for the kitchen.
From 1,500 to 5,000 euros for the kitchen is the comfort class.
And everything from 5,000 euros and above to infinity is the premium class.
This is the vertical class.
What can be done in the horizontal class?
In the horizontal class, you can try to analyze yourself and your competitors in terms of the quality of the furniture offered,
in terms of its functionality, in terms of design, in terms of service support, in terms of manufacturing times.
The next variable is whether we offer the kitchen to the client on credit or not.
Another variable that we discuss with our competitors is the number of salons.
Some have more salons, some have fewer.
And the last variable is the recognition.
And this is what happens.
If you use all these variables, you can make four matrices.
A company called Capri is trying to understand its place in the industry.
How is it with quality and functionality compared to competitors?
How is it with terms and with the ability to sell on credit compared to the main competitors?
How does it look against the background of competitors in terms of furniture design and service support?
And how does it look compared to competitors in terms of design and the width of the company's network of salons?
If we do it in the format of one page only, we get a fairly clear picture of our own position in the industry compared to our competitors.
A very useful tool is the analysis of strategic groups.
It is used when we analyze our own competitors and try to understand our own place in our industry.
When we analyze our competitors, we should ask ourselves the following questions.
What are the strengths and weaknesses of the main players?
What does our competitors do better than us?
What does our competitors do worse than us?
As we look into the future, we should try to predict how the players in our industry will behave in the near future.
What are their strategies? What will they do? What will they not do?
And how will their behavior in the next two or three years affect the situation in the industry?
The third question we can ask ourselves is how great is the ability of players to negotiate with each other.
Can we be friends? Can we share our influence?
If we can, how high is the probability that our competitors will comply with the agreements and not violate them?
This is how we try to understand our competitors.
The second strength that Porter considers important is the power of the substitutes.
I repeat that these are players from other industries, but they are able to withdraw money from our industry.
There are industries where there are not many substitutes, or there are none.
But if a company produces glass, it is very difficult to say that there is a serious substitute.
You can use plastic instead of glass, but there is no clear substitute for glass.
Or a website for a company.
It is clear that no one had websites before, and companies were somehow similar, but now everyone has websites.
It is unlikely that there is a clear substitute for a website.
But there are industries where you have to make up with the actions of a large number of substitutes.
Remember the German brewery.
Or if your company works in the pharmaceutical market, offering a cold medicine to a client,
it can face a problem.
My good Czech friend says that the Czech Republic is traditionally saved from a cold with a beer in a pot.
And they do not buy Fervex, Coldrex or other drugs.
Here is a substitute for you.
This is something from another industry that is able to withdraw money from ours.
The third strength is the client.
When we analyze clients, we try to understand how clients can trade with us at a price and payment.
The first thing we have to do is segment the clients.
We have to form more or less popular segments.
These are groups of clients that are similar in a certain set of characteristics.
And then we have to assess the strength of each segment.
Because talking about clients in general is not about anything.
It is too general, not specific and useless.
Therefore, the conclusion is that the number 0 stage is segmentation of clients for the subsequent analysis of each segment.
This slide is an example of an attempt to segment the client market in the industry that produces and sells shoes.
There are 8 criteria for segmentation.
Income level, floor, age, shoe size, geography of residence, city size, occupation type and attitude to fashion or style.
These are the 8 criteria for segmentation.
A company that produces shoes and has its own shoe store network considers important in its business.
Let's look at the income level.
There is a group of clients that earn up to 300 euros per month.
There is a group of clients that earn 300-500 euros per month.
Next, 500-700.
The fourth group is in the range of 700-1000 euros per month.
Another segment is from 1000 to 2000.
And the last segment is clients that can earn from 2000 euros per month.
So, in a large cell, we divided the income level of clients into 6 groups.
I repeat, the shoe industry.
The second criteria for segmentation is floor.
It's simple.
The third criteria is age.
The company made its clients in 6 age categories.
Up to 16 years.
16-21 years.
21-30.
30-45.
45-60.
And from 60 years.
The sizes.
The sizes of the shoes.
Up to 35.
36-37.
38-39.
40-41.
42-43.
And 44 and above.
The company operates on 3 geographic markets.
Each market has its own nuances.
There are nuances of the Ukrainian market, nuances of the Baltic market, nuances of the Russian market.
Let's recall PEST.
Politics, economy, social technology.
All these 4 letters can be distinguished on these 3 markets.
Ukrainian, Baltic and Russian.
The company operates in different cities.
There are no stores yet, but there may be stores in cities with up to 20,000 inhabitants.
Again, there are no stores yet, but this is an interesting segment.
Cities with up to 20-50,000 inhabitants.
Next segment is 50-100,000 inhabitants.
The next segment is 100-1,500.
From 500,000 to a million-city is another segment.
And the last segment is a city with a million-city and above.
The type of occupation of the client is divided into a large number of groups.
We see only 4 groups on this slide.
For example, a student, an office manager of a middle level, an office manager of a high level, a head of a workshop, etc.
The company makes its clients into 3 groups.
Interested, moderate and indifferent.
Let's look at 2 target segments.
Let's try to understand how the company should work with these segments.
The next slide shows a grey segment.
This is a man who earns 2,000 euros.
He is 55 years old.
He is 43 years old.
He lives in Russia.
The population of the city is 750,000.
He works as a head of a workshop in one of the businesses.
He has a rather indifferent attitude to fashion.
This is his portrait.
This is a portrait of a second client.
This is a woman who earns 620 euros per month.
She is 24 years old.
She is 37 years old.
She lives in Ukraine, in a million-city, Kiev.
She works as an office manager of a middle level.
She has an attitude to fashion.
These are 2 very different clients.
If a company wants to work with grey and yellow,
it should understand the portrait of each client.
It is very simple.
The better we understand our client, the more we earn.
If we can draw a portrait of our grey client in the smallest details,
there is a high probability that we will earn a lot.
If a company is oriented to the yellow and grey segments,
its entire chain of processes,
from the design, to the purchase, to the production,
to the branding, to the distribution, to the retail,
can be very different.
One chain of processes will be focused on the yellow segment,
and the other chain of processes will be focused on the grey segment.
We should understand this very well.
When we analyze our clients,
the list of questions can be as follows.
First of all, as we have already said,
we try to assess the profitability of our target segments.
How much the yellow or grey segments,
or any other segment that interests us,
can trade with us in terms of price and payment conditions,
and how it will be able to change in the near future.
What is our current situation, and what will it be in 2-3 years?
The second question is the volume of purchases.
How much and how often does one segment buy,
and how much and how often does the other segment buy?
It may be that your business has a segment that buys a little bit, but often,
or maybe you have a segment that buys a lot, but very rarely.
The client's portrait changes.
It is one now, tomorrow it will be another.
We should understand how the needs of the target segments,
which we are focused on in our business, will change in the near future.
The next factor, which can be very important in some industries,
is the cost of switching from one provider to another,
and the level of loyalty.
What do I mean by this?
If we are talking about household chemicals,
for example, washing powder,
then in this industry the cost of switching from one player to another is usually not very high.
Today I am using one washing powder,
tomorrow I will not like it, I will switch it to another,
and it is not difficult for me.
However, if we are talking about software for business,
some IT solution,
then switching from one provider to another is like a marriage-divorce process.
It is quite difficult, painful and expensive.
If the costs of switching from one provider to another are high,
then the client's power will be higher.
Another factor that we can analyze,
is the share of costs of buying the product we offer in the cost structure.
For example, if we offer the end product to the client,
and the client is a metallurgical plant,
then the share of costs of buying the product will be low,
and the price sensitivity will be low.
If we offer the end product to a metallurgical plant at a high price,
the client will not feel it,
because the share of the total purchases in the structure is negligible.
Another point that we should analyze,
is the possibility of integration forward or backward along the chain.
What do I mean?
Let's imagine an oil refinery,
which can rewind the chain of its processes.
What does it mean?
It means that it can try to put drilling towers in the oil production area,
or extend the chain forward,
or make its own network of gas stations.
If we have the opportunity to extend the chain forward,
we are an oil refinery,
and we can easily put our own gas stations,
then our position in negotiations on the price of the gas network is stronger.
Another factor is the seasonality.
So, the conclusion is as follows.
We segment our clients in order to understand the needs and behavior of each of the segments that interest us,
and to work with each of them in different ways.
It is obvious that the work of a company with a target segment of a woman of pre-retirement age,
who works as a chief accountant of a large machine-building enterprise,
and who values agility and comfort in shoes,
should work with one method, and with another target segment.
A young woman of 25 years,
who prefers brightness, style and uniqueness in shoes,
with this target segment of the company,
in all parts of the chain of its own processes,
should work differently.
It is very important to understand how the portrait of your client will change in the near future,
and to be prepared for the fact that the chain of processes will have to be redone and sharpened to meet the needs of each segment.
The second example on the same topic is from another industry,
the production of kitchen furniture.
The company that we have already talked about,
divides its clients into four segments in terms of payment capabilities,
highlighting low incomes, medium, medium-high and high,
as well as into four parts in terms of proven values.
The example of this matrix, the example of segmentation of clients,
is described in detail in this business in your materials.
Having discussed our clients,
and analyzed the target segments,
and chosen the most interesting for ourselves,
we should think about how to take these chests with money at the lowest possible costs for resources.
In this case, we need to analyze the suppliers.
It is very useful to imagine the reports of profits and losses,
in which on the one hand there are incomes, and on the other there are expenses.
When we analyze the clients, we try to find those interesting segments
from which we could take more money,
and sharpen our chain of processes accordingly.
When we analyze our suppliers, we are talking about our expenses.
Here we should analyze all the articles of our costs.
It can be raw materials, it can be electricity, it can be equipment suppliers,
it can be suppliers of square meters of heating and lighting,
it can be suppliers of all kinds of services, transport, information, insurance, and so on.
It can be channels of communication with clients.
If we decide that advertising time on TV is very expensive,
we can try to reach out to the client via the Internet,
or through external advertising, or some other means.
A very important supplier is the staff that supplies us with their heads and hands,
which we use in our business and for which we pay some money.
And, of course, a very important supplier is the supplier of capital.
It can be banks, it can be other structures that can give us money for development,
and the money is not free, it costs a certain percentage.
One way or another, we have to go through the entire list of our expenses,
evaluating the ability of suppliers to trade with us at the price and on the terms of payment.
The main questions when analyzing suppliers are as follows.
First of all, again, it is the ability to trade at the price and on the terms of payment.
The second question is readiness for the stability of deliveries,
both the quality parameters and the time parameters.
Is the supplier we work with able to provide us with the level of quality we would like to have
and to supply our product or service that is stated in the contract?
The third question we can ask ourselves is whether there are substitutes for the product that the supplier supplies us with.
If there are, then the position of the supplier in negotiations changes, the power of the supplier decreases.
The same thing happens if we have an alternative for each type of resource,
if we can turn to a large enough list of suppliers.
For example, if we open the yellow page of the reference book,
and for each type of resource we need in our industry there are 384 tomato suppliers,
and all the tomato suppliers have the same number of suppliers,
then the power of the tomato suppliers over us will be small.
In some industries, a fairly important factor may be the distance of the suppliers,
as well as the ability to integrate back and forth.
If our supplier can easily extend the chain forward,
become our direct competitor, then his position in negotiations is stronger.
And vice versa, if we can easily unwind the chain and tell the supplier
that we are able to make the parts that you supply us,
then it is very easy for us.
Accordingly, our position in negotiations becomes stronger.
The second task that I recommend you to do is to analyze the factors of the environment,
try to understand your industry through the FiveForce model, the five forces of Michael Porter.
Everyone has competition, everyone has clients and suppliers,
and there are entry barriers in any industry.
Is there a substitute product factor in your business?
I don't know, because there are companies for which there is no problem with a substitute product,
but there are industries where there are a lot of substitute products from other industries.
There is a point of view that Porter did not take into account all the factors in the industry within his FiveForce concept.
For example, some experts suggest adding the sixth force of the state,
but in principle, the state factor can be spread over all the five forces,
because the state can be a competitor, a supplier, a client,
an entry barrier, like a writer of some regulatory acts or a customs officer.
But in principle, we discussed the state factor when we were submitting the PEST analysis.
The letter P, the letter P, the legal issues, we discussed them.
But it seems to me that everything is quite consistent and logical in the FiveForce concept.
Please remember that you are not just listing factors,
you are again, as with the PEST analysis, trying to understand what this means for your business,
what is included in the list of actions, what is included in the to-do list.
If the client's demand increases and the clients will be divided into more or less homogeneous groups,
each of which will have its own specific needs, requests, and so on,
then you will most likely need to develop a certain service model for each target group,
develop a standard, train the staff and control the implementation of this standard.
This is a fairly specific action that we record in our strategy, analyzing our clients.
And please remember that if your business operates at the junction of industries,
IT, marketing, business education, the recreation industry,
you will have to do this work twice, do the analysis of the FiveForce for both industries,
to take into account all the factors that you need to track when developing your strategy.